welcome back class in this lecture we
discussed heart and lung transplantation
so this is the last lecture of our
course I think it's a nice way to kind
of wrap things up because you know heart
and lung transplantation is probably the
most medically complex condition that
we'll be working with as a therapist or
anyone in the seventh setting or system
so we'll go over the indication for
heart and lung transplantation like what
kind of goes into the decision to to get
one of these workings we'll go over the
types of transplants types of rejection
some of the other unique complications
that arise after a Heartland transplants
to give an understanding you just like
the medical decisions what you know the
transplant team is kind of looking at
and what to be aware of if we're working
with this population and we'll go over
you know the medications as well that
you know take any pre-imposed as well as
the rehab consideration so a little bit
insight my residency training was spent
at the William s Middleton VA Medical
Center in Madison Wisconsin our
cardiopulmonary residency there which
was also affiliated with the University
of Wisconsin Madison shout out to Jim
Carlson and and the crew out there
Tim Erickson as well and Stacy bricks
and you know so a lot of my time in the
first year of practice was spent working
with this population specifically so
this is something that's kind of near
and dear to my heart specialist training
in this and yeah big shout out to the
crew in Madison Wisconsin for an
excellent program so just a little bit
of insight you know there are a large
number of these procedures being done
every year if you look at the numbers
you know kidneys we do about 21,000 of
these you know transplants per year
you know hearts we're doing I think now
3,000 and you know this is just us data
so we're doing a lot of these now if we
look however at the number of procedures
that are done and the individuals who
need
a life-saving organ transplant right
74 thousand are on the waiting list
right and total transplantations right
this is from last year's data 2020 18
data the number of transplants performed
right but nine thousand right about
coming from four thousand donors right
kidney donor you can sometimes get too
long sometimes you can get too so this
speaks to that there is an exceedingly
large number of patients who need a
transplant which makes sense and kind of
like why I like to get under this
lecture at the end because organ
transplant is the is the final solution
for someone or they ultimate solution
for someone with a significant you know
heart failure or COPD or chronic lung
disease chronic heart disease you know
with a heart just you know we can't
support it through micro circulatory or
through mechanical circulatory support
like an LVAD that we need to get a new
heart in there we need to get new lungs
in there and as you know we're seeing a
large number of patients with heart
failure specifically more complex heart
failure because we can keep them alive
longer same sort of thing with COPD and
other lung diseases so you know as our
population ages as more comorbidities
continue to become - pandemic levels
this is gonna continue to be a big
problem there's just not enough organs
to go around we'll talk about some
potential solutions to this with bio
engineering different things that were
looking on and the evolution of elvas
has certainly helped this but as you can
see it's a big problem there are a lot
of people who need these organs and we
just don't have enough so I'll get into
the decisions that go into giving
someone organ because a lot of what we
try to do is make sure that if we give
someone in organ that organ that patient
right that that gift right that that
very the the ultimate sacrifice the
person can give to someone is is given
the best opportunity to for success
because there's thousands of people out
there that could you know that aren't
getting it right so we want to make sure
that when forgiving an organ to someone
that it's it's it's going to be a
successor
much of success as we possibly can make
it to be okay so some key transplant
terms so allograft you may see this
referred to as a homograft or autologous
is individuals of the same species right
so an auto August's is within the same
individual so anything within the same
species as an allograft autologous would
be you know the same individual so we've
seen it's often with a skin transplant
so someone will take skin from you if
they have a burn or a significant you
know dermal lesion they'll take skin
from an area and move it or we often see
stem cells or you know PRP injections
like that's auto August's so it's taking
tissue from the same individual but an
allograft is the umbrella term for
anything any one of the same species
obviously for taking it from yourself
you're part of the same species right
orthotopic is it is the tissue
transplant is graph into its normal
anatomic position you know so heart
transplant is going to be put in the
same orientation same thing with lungs
allergenic means it's between
individuals of the same species but
different genetic constitutions so you
know they're a menagerie incompatible so
it'll be human to human but they're not
linked up you know their immune systems
not exactly one of the same or a similar
or is incompatible and there's hetero
logis so hetero graph Rosina or genetic
so it's between individual different
species picked a human so back in the
early days actually the first person who
did the it was a heart transplant been
him bannered who looked at doing
I think pig pig to heart transplant I
actually I've been the first guy who did
a lung transplant either way there were
experiments looking at giving you know
different different organs for different
animals to humans we don't do this as
much anymore we may see this as well
heterotopic so transfer an organ tissue
from one party to another we talk about
skin grass and homologous you know
corresponding to a similar structure
position or origin so there's some key
terms here now in terms of complicate
nations you know there are several that
can occur from a transplantation a lot
of it just has to do with different
stages so rejection has three
classifications we'll get into that so
hyper acute acute and chronic rejection
they're all due to slightly different
processes so hyper acute it's an ABO or
ABO antigen mixed max of the ABO kind of
signals on your cells right the cells
get recognized by your body and you're
like wait a minute this is farm and
we're gonna tack it in destroy it this
happens within the first 48 hours after
a transplantation then there is a cute
rejection which is mediated by HLA
mismatch will get into that as well and
the same kind of thing we recognize
there are body recognizes or immune
system recognizes this is foreign in a
taxon right so we see you know damage to
the cells of the trans but an organ and
in chronic rejection media through
slightly different mechanisms and an
example we have you're looking at blood
vessels we see this kind of these
changes here so we'll get into the
specifics infections obviously a big
concern these patients once they're
given a an organ transplant are going to
be their immune systems gonna be
suppressed so their body takes it again
we're introducing was as well as we can
match up people's you know immune system
we can match up their different antigens
all these different things and have a
good match it's still a foreign agent
your body's gonna recognize as a foreign
agent it's not you know your body is not
you know attuned to knowing that this
organ is here to save my life it's
recognizing your white blood cells are
recognizing oh this is a foreign agent I
need to destroy it right cuz it's
evolved to add to keep ourselves alive
if we you know had a foreign agent like
a bacteria or anything like that so
recognizes at foreign so we need to
suppress that response to allow these
organs eventually take right to get you
know accepted by our immune system as
much as we can because of that infection
rates gonna be high kidney failure a lot
of the drugs that we give patients for
managing the again the immune response
it can up can really beat up a kidney
especially calcineurin inhibitors
osteoporosis and malignancies the
malignancies related sometimes may be to
medications as well as just immune
suppression like a healthy immune system
is really good at recognizing you know
these abnormal cells or abnormal
proliferation of cells and we suppress
that can you know increase our risk of
certain cancers so that actually is a
big concern I've actually had a few
patients unfortunately who we've lost
two cancers after after having a
successful transplantation it's one of
the unfortunate things so hyperacute
rejection against characterized by
ischemia in the chris is that the graph
that occurs at the time of transplant up
to 48 hours so this happens very very
shortly me needed by ABO so that you
know what we see or how we pair or each
other up for by blood type antigens next
max gave so this happens and why it's so
problematic is that it happens before
revascularisation of the graph takes
place so there's no blood flow to the
organ so the manifestations you have
malaise a very high fever and like and
then signs of oregon failure the problem
is like the patient to survival needing
an immediate retrains plantation to
survive because if you know again it's
not taking and there's no blood supply
it takes a little bit time for the blood
vessels it kind of like you know the
fully revascularize so unresponsive
treatment and the only way to fight off
the immune response is a remove the
remove the organ and find a new one
again like i mentioned that's not always
an option very rarely as an option the
other would be a cube rejection this is
treatable and reversible to a degree
occurs within the first year so
hypercute it's like the first you know
couple of hours right for a couple of
the first couple of days 24 to 48 hours
acute would be anything that happens
within the first year so it's made by
the human leukocyte antigen so basically
that your t lymphocytes
detect a foreign antigens right you know
different projections in the cellular
membrane from the graft we open the
tissues in the graft and they the immune
response is triggered so basically what
you see you'll see signs of organ
failure you know
the organs so if someone's got you know
a heart a heart transplant you might see
you know s3 gallops might see jugular
vein distension these are on the right
kind of generalized signs you might see
a sudden weight gain peripheral edema
swelling dist Mia they may see a change
it's a urine output swelling all these
different things again like the body is
having this just kind of global immune
response and is attacking the organ
because it's recognized it as oh man
this is a foreign thing I gotta I gotta
kill this thing get it out of the body
so heart related symptoms again you
might see basically signs of heart
failure right because it's essentially
kind of what's happening you having this
almost Myositis of the heart muscle
because it's being attacked by your
immune system so you might see an s3 gal
up the patient may start developing
arrhythmias might see some jvd jugular
vein distension when the hallmark signs
for heart and lung is a decrease
exercise tolerance is kind of why it can
be very useful or wipe you know like the
the post transplant you need to be aware
of this stuff because you know you'll be
working with these patients sometimes
three to five times a week
exercising them so if you can see hey
like they were working out at five Mets
you know yesterday but today they could
only tolerate three meds and they're
showing these other signs hey let's get
them to the transplant team and get
these things monitored right this
decrease exercise tolerance is a pretty
hallmark sign that's not a good sign
lung related symptoms the big one we
look for is fev1 so the FEV ones will be
decreased by more than ten percent
compared to what their baseline values
are again will start seeing decrease to
saturation the decrease exercise stars
in it again anything that looks like
basically chronic lung disease right
we've you know we've given them a
healthy long we shouldn't be seeing
those signs and if you start seeing that
ortiz acute sudden changes it could be a
few things none of them are particularly
good you know that that calls for hey
let's get the transplant team notified
so we can manage us maybe it could be an
infection but it could be rejection and
that's that's a big that's a different
scenario and it can be a potentially a
big problem
and that chronic rejection curves out
for the first year transplant patient
it's a gradual deterioration the graph
of the graph it's it's progressive
you'll still see those organ related
symptoms it might be asymptomatic in the
earlier stages and you again will see
this histological changes of tissues so
chronic rejection again the big time
lines are at 24 to 48 hours for
hypercute so it's like the body's just
not taking it at all and then there's a
cute rejection which is can occur
anytime after that 48 hour window up to
a year and then there's chronic
rejection which happens after year
that's why typically like the big
markers for a lot of patient for a lot
of transplant success is based on the
first year right you know because that's
when we know oacute rejection that's
kind of what's gonna happen so post
transplant again pregnant kidney feel
like I mentioned you know a lot of the
drugs that we give patients to manage
the immune response can be really really
gnarly on the kidneys and this is true
for any type of transplantation but we
see this again you know we're talking
about heart and lungs here
and a lot of it occurs the longer you
kind of get out you know at you know
from transplant the higher the resonance
and it's due to just chronically being
on those those medications and then post
transplant osteoporosis a lot of this
has to do again with some of the
medications as well as you may be on
corticosteroids I'm going to talk about
the pulmonary unit steroids basically
cortisol right those guca corticoids
which can leech bone mineral density
right causing weakening of the bones
there also may be some issues with the
other immunosuppressants patients are
taking as well but osteoporosis can be a
big problem due to those steroids and
patients are given so a lot of
facilities now are looking at really
trying to aggressively wean people off
of steroids just to you know prevent
another complication you know while
they're dealing with being post organ
transplant another complication we see
are infections so the highest risk for
infections really within the first three
months but it can occur at any time
after transplantation just what I've
seen will show you
data from the IH AST which talks about
trends after transplantation the general
signs an affection again fever being a
big one temperature greater than 38
degrees Celsius fatigue shaking chills
like you've all had a you know a viral
infection maybe maybe a bacterial
infection in your day but those kind of
signs right you know diarrhea lasting
longer than two days a sore throat dis
me like those are all bad things me
something something good foot here the
temperature of being a big one so if you
see that in a patient you know we're
gonna make sure that we get them to the
transplant team get that managed the
other complication we may see is
malignancy right so again you know it's
it's not too uncommon for patients with
an organ transplant to develop some sort
of malignancy or cancer a healthy immune
system it's really important for
removing those damaged dysfunctional
cells that you know produce these
irregularities we can recognize that and
destroy it with our immune system it's
healthy again these patients are
chronically immunosuppressed to keep
these organs from getting rejected by
your body so it sets the stage not only
for infection but you know malignancies
so we typically see lymphoproliferative
disorders as the most common so various
lymphomas and leukemias or kind of what
we see here so again it's one of the
unfortunate realities of transplant care
you knows that they may these may
successfully get through organ
transplantation and live you know
healthy life but they may develop a
cancer and of dying from that and I've
known a few patients have had that
succumb to that and it's quite
unfortunate
alright so post transplant meds so big
thing patients are on like 30 to 40
pills a day you know it's it's a lot of
medications a little many of them are
depressants if they have an infection
maybe an antibiotic and then various
different minerals you know in vitamins
to kind of keep again bone health
maintained and other different things
other immune functions maintained so
because of that like patients are given
like strict instructions on how to
follow them as well as their care get
before they are discharged this is
because like if you more than anything
you need to be you need to be staying
compliant as medications you miss one
you could be disastrous and usually
patients like will go through a pre
transplant education just to make sure
that they know what they need to do even
before they get transplanted because
like again if we give someone the
decision to give someone in Oregon
you're choosing them over thousands of
other people potentially right we need
to make sure this organ is given the
best opportunity to be successful in
this case so if they're not if you're
demonstrating a lack of compliance their
lack of just understanding or they don't
have a provider or partner with them
that can help them they may it may cause
them to not be listed or to be receive
an organ because of concerns or
psychosocial concerns or these other
other factors so again like don't on
their Condor count this this compliance
with medications they need to know what
they need to do so now even before there
they're even listed for organ
transplantation that's usually done in
the pre transplant workups all this
education seminars so some of the major
ones you'll see patients are on or
calcineurin inhibitors which inhibit the
actions of calcineurin which activates
the T cells in your immune system
patients will be on these typically long
term like the entire time they're on a
with an organ transplant plus organ
transplant some facilities are looking
at weaning these down this mannequins
again these calcineurin inhibitors can
lead to can lead to hypertension due to
changes in the kidneys they can really
beat up the kidneys so often the
patient's grf or globular filtration
rate will be will be will be monitored
GFR not GF g RF GFR will be monitored
gaaah meal air filtration rate to look
at how well the kidneys are functioning
and because you know these two
specifically cyclosporine and tacrolimus
which are probably the two biggest ones
we see can really do some gnarly thinks
that kidneys especially tacrolimus which
is probably the more common made we see
now program
so calcineurin inhibitors can lead to
kidney problems and and in hypertension
related to that kidney problem and then
corticosteroids if we mentioned
corticosteroids are you know
anti-inflammatory potent one they
inhibit t-cell activation there used
early on the treat rejection dosage is
usually tamper down again we talked
about methyl prentiss ohm which forget
that high highly highly highly potent
corticosteroid typically use more in the
short term again over that you know
potential risk for hyperacute rejection
and then prednisone which is typically
low patients are given long term it is a
pill just to make sure that again like
we're keeping that immune system down
the problem with that is will show here
immuno suppression again you know can
lead to all kinds of issues where we
talked about the cancer is different
surcoat sarcomas Kaposi's sarcoma which
we actually seen HIV great these you
know these changes there again because
our immune systems compromised we can
see quite often with corticosteroids
diabetes just because of the you know
the worst spiking blood sugars because
we're basically giving the body extra
cortisol we talked about that
osteoporosis issues with corticosteroids
myopathies tendon issues as well if
we're giving people long term critical
steroids there may often be confusion or
just altered Mental Status because again
if you start giving people essentially
cortisol it's gonna affect their their
mew drug mood mood regulation because
cortisol is involved in that as well and
again we talked about the renal failure
especially with those calcineurin
inhibitors and then you may even see
certain neuropathies or paresthesias
again due to side effects of these meds
so just because we may have had success
so organ transplantation does not mean
that they're through the clear of other
issues which are related to the care you
know post transplant and again there's
just some of the examples you know the
concerns we can have with medications so
with that we'll get into you know we
summarize some of the key problems or
key complications related to organ
transplant in general
touched on a little bit about heart and
lung and then the next two series of
units will do heart transplantation kind
of what that all entails then we'll do
one a lung transplantation and it will
end up wrapping up with post transplant
rehab and then some potential you know
things that may arise in the future
where bio technologies thank you